WebAssembly edits (#4401)
HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org: src/content/en/2025/webassembly.md

  )
}}

> Our analysis shows while WebAssembly's adoption in 2021 0.04% was, we find that in 2025, it has grown to 0.35% on desktop and 0.28% on mobile, representing approximately 43,000 sites for each platform within our dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our analysis shows while WebAssembly's [adoption in 2021 was 0.04%](../2021/webassembly#how-many-modules), in 2025 it has grown to 0.35% on desktop and 0.28% on mobile, representing approximately 43,000 sites for each platform within our dataset.
```

  )
}}

> We find that WebAssembly adoption has grown from 0.04% in 2021, although rates have remained consistent over the last two years. In 2025, we found WebAssembly modules on 0.35% of desktop sites and 0.28% of mobile sites, representing approximately 43,000 sites. Furthermore, mobile adoption was lower than desktop adoption in all observed years, averaging a 30% difference.

Reviewer: Repeat of above. Remove one.

Reviewer: This was resolved without resolving the issue.

## WebAssembly requests

{{ figure_markup(
  image="number-of-wasm-requests.png",
  caption="Number of Wasm requests",
  description="Bar chart showing total Wasm, unique Wasm files and unique response by modules with both clients.",
  chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vSXX1UpspK3gNeMVyApXrSYk42_Wmeh9RVpGarOFbs9EVbuU8wDyQh72Mu9PckmNat2wRqfP4kVAOki/pubchart?oid=74534440&format=interactive",
  sql_file="counts.sql",
  sheets_gid="540023407"
  )
}}

Overall, we recorded 303,496 WebAssembly requests on desktop and 308,971 on mobile. Although more desktop sites utilize WebAssembly, the total volume of requests is slightly higher on mobile.

Furthermore, we identified 157,967 unique URLs on desktop and 165,870 on mobile. To estimate the number of unique binaries, we grouped modules by identical filename and response size. Using this method, we found 87,596 unique Wasm modules on desktop and 84,851 on mobile. These findings indicate that approximately 72% of WebAssembly requests serve duplicate modules, highlighting substantial reuse of libraries across the web.

> 

Reviewer: Nit, remove unnecessary extra new line:

```suggestion

```

  )
}}

The standard `application/wasm` MIME type was identified in 293,470 desktop and 301,127 mobile requests. Instances of missing or incorrect MIME types (such as `text/html` or `text/plain`) were low, affecting 3.2% of desktop and 2.4% of mobile requests. These represent a significant decline compared to 2021, indicating improved awareness and adherence to proper server configuration.

> 

Reviewer 2: This observervation shows about developer awareness when building wasm, can we have this as

Some requests lacked a `Content-Type` header, and some had incorrect MIME types, such as `text/html` or `text/plain`, they are 3.2% and 2.4% of requests  respectively on desktop and mobile. Compared to 2022, these percentages have dropped significantly, indicating increased awareness in setting the correct MIME type for Wasm applications.

### Module size

{{ figure_markup(

>   image="raw-response-sizes.png",

Reviewer 2: Yes, It is confusing bit !

You would know, We have various techniques for compression i.e. br, gzip, zstd. We can show in year 2021 along with the chart.

We know and according to our past research with benchmarks; for the best performance to achive, 

<img width="649" height="270" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ed0d5042-1587-484d-a104-b0de559acecc" />

Apart from this compression, We are also using optimization tools and techniques offine in deploy pipeline.

Wasm are also practiced to compressed further with recommended tools like Brotli -- I believe without such compression, as a developer like myself and many colleagues / friends outside use to term such "raw" wasm as  "uncompressed" wasm -- they are compressed but not compressed with LZ77 algorithm, Huffman coding, 2nd-order context modeling and or other latest techniques.

and @nrllh  and @tunetheweb , This was the reason, 
We have detail explaination in our Year 2021 article about how to optimize compression with Brotli after raw compression session.

We would also have compression detail session for both clients I believe that would help them to understand the compression technique evolution for WebAssembly so far.

  )
}}

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

WebAssembly module sizes vary drastically based on their specific use cases. We observed that the bottom 50% of modules are quite small, ranging between 2 KB and 14 KB. These are typically "micro-utilities" like Base64 encoders or checksum calculators, often written in AssemblyScript or Rust to handle performance-critical tasks where JavaScript lacks precision.

> Conversely, at the 90th percentile, sizes increase significantly to 381 KB on desktop and 316 KB on mobile. These larger binaries usually represent full desktop-grade applications ported to the web—such as Adobe Photoshop or Google Earth—compiled from heavier languages like C++ or C# to handle complex 3D rendering and logic.

Author: My understanding from the data we have is that one WebAssembly application often relies on multiple other small modules, which increases the total number of modules and causes also these statistics here at 90th percentile .

  )
}}

> When examining uncompressed sizes, we observe that while the median module remains lightweight at approximately 30 KB on both platforms, the largest binaries at the 90th percentile are significantly heavier on desktop (897 KB) than on mobile (756 KB).

Author: @nimeshgit could you please help us to understand this.

> When examining uncompressed sizes, we observe that while the median module remains lightweight at approximately 30 KB on both platforms, the largest binaries at the 90th percentile are significantly heavier on desktop (897 KB) than on mobile (756 KB).

Reviewer 2: Barry, The Wasm is fundamentally a binary instruction format, not typically a text format. the format sent over the wire is the compact binary format (wasm). 

It has built in compression.

It is observed that applying Gzip or Brotli to an already highly optimized binary file yields minimal additional size savings (often less than 10%, sometimes even negligible), Because of the minimal benefit of compression, Barry the Wasm files are typically served with an identity encoding, meaning no further general purpose compression is applied

  )
}}

> Beyond these standard distributions, the dataset contains significant outliers. The largest single WebAssembly module identified measured 228 MB on desktop and 166 MB on mobile, indicating the deployment of large-scale client-side applications.

Reviewer: This comment was resolved without resolving the issue.

  )
}}

> We find that System (43%), Microsoft (23%), RXEngine (6%), and Dotnet (6%) are the most popular libraries or frameworks used in WebAssembly modules, indicating Microsoft's dominance within this ecosystem, driven specifically by the Dotnet and Blazor frameworks.

Author: I am not super confident, but after a bit Googling, System is the library used in most Microsoft's Wasm frameworks. 

@nimeshgit can you please help us to clarify it?

Do you have further data we can understand these libraries (and their origin) better?

> We find that System (43%), Microsoft (23%), RXEngine (6%), and Dotnet (6%) are the most popular libraries or frameworks used in WebAssembly modules, indicating Microsoft's dominance within this ecosystem, driven specifically by the Dotnet and Blazor frameworks.

Reviewer 2: We have the updated detail stats, please have a look on this [sheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/16z2MNwq8FFbuNYcJJZceML6rB5VAmBXNNHZy5FZuf8g/edit?gid=101432539#gid=101432539)

> We find that System (43%), Microsoft (23%), RXEngine (6%), and Dotnet (6%) are the most popular libraries or frameworks used in WebAssembly modules, indicating Microsoft's dominance within this ecosystem, driven specifically by the Dotnet and Blazor frameworks.

Reviewer 2: We have run tool offline found and libraries + framework stats which are specifically used under Microsoft eco system,  These numbers are interesting, please have a look from [here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/16z2MNwq8FFbuNYcJJZceML6rB5VAmBXNNHZy5FZuf8g/edit?gid=1181339291#gid=1181339291)

> We find that System (43%), Microsoft (23%), RXEngine (6%), and Dotnet (6%) are the most popular libraries or frameworks used in WebAssembly modules, indicating Microsoft's dominance within this ecosystem, driven specifically by the Dotnet and Blazor frameworks.

Reviewer 2: lets resolve on slack tomorrow afternoon.

> We find that System (43%), Microsoft (23%), RXEngine (6%), and Dotnet (6%) are the most popular libraries or frameworks used in WebAssembly modules, indicating Microsoft's dominance within this ecosystem, driven specifically by the Dotnet and Blazor frameworks.

Author: I removed the part ".. indicating.."

  )
}}

We find that Bulk Memory is the most widely adopted feature, appearing in 187,674 desktop and 204,103 mobile modules. This feature improves performance by allowing efficient copying and initialization of large memory blocks, mirroring the efficiency of the native memcpy function in C. Furthermore, Sign Extension—which provides operators for extending integer values (such as extending an 8-bit integer to 32-bit)—is the second most popular feature, found in 45,969 desktop and 50,394 mobile modules.

## Conclusions

> We observe a significant increase in WebAssembly adoption over the last five years, rising from 0.04% in 2021 to 0.35% in 2025, though growth has stabilized in the last two years. Usage is most prevalent on high-ranking websites and decreases significantly among less popular pages. We find that WebAssembly is currently deployed for two distinct purposes: handling specific utility functions (such as encryption or checksums) and powering full standalone applications. Furthermore, our findings highlight the widespread adoption of Microsoft’s frameworks, indicating their significant role in driving the current WebAssembly ecosystem.

Reviewer: We (over)use "we observe" a lot in this chapter. Can we think of alternative wording here to avoid that repitition? To me just going with this reads better:

```suggestion
WebAssembly adoption has significantly increased over the last four years, rising from 0.04% in 2021 to 0.35% in 2025, though growth has stabilized in the last two years. Usage is most prevalent on high-ranking websites and decreases significantly among less popular pages. We find that WebAssembly is currently deployed for two distinct purposes: handling specific utility functions (such as encryption or checksums) and powering full standalone applications. Furthermore, our findings highlight the widespread adoption of Microsoft’s frameworks, indicating their significant role in driving the current WebAssembly ecosystem.
```

I also changed "five years" to "four years" as talking about 2021 to 2025.
